README.md, before:

# Storybook Vue3 Router

[![minified + gzip size](https://badgen.net/bundlephobia/minzip/storybook-vue3-router)](https://bundlephobia.com/package/storybook-vue3-router)
[![Npm package monthly downloads](https://badgen.net/npm/dm/storybook-vue3-router)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/storybook-vue3-router)
[![Release](https://github.com/NickMcBurney/storybook-vue3-router/actions/workflows/release.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/NickMcBurney/storybook-vue3-router/actions/workflows/release.yml)
[![CodeFactor](https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/nickmcburney/storybook-vue3-router/badge)](https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/nickmcburney/storybook-vue3-router)
[![Storybook](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/storybookjs/brand/master/badge/badge-storybook.svg?sanitize=true)](https://storybook.js.org/addons/storybook-vue3-router/)

A Storybook decorator that allows you to use your Vue 3 routing-aware components.

If you want to build stories for Vue 3 components using `<router-view>` or `<router-link>` then you need to wrap your stories with `vue-router` this addon will allow for you to easily do this.

## How to use
This decorator works with Storybook's [Component Story Format (CSF)](https://storybook.js.org/docs/vue/api/csf) and [hoisted CSF annotations](https://github.com/storybookjs/storybook/blob/next/MIGRATION.md#hoisted-csf-annotations), which is the recommended way to write stories since Storybook 6. It has not been tested with the [storiesOf API](https://github.com/storybookjs/storybook/blob/master/lib/core/docs/storiesOf.md).

### Install the decorator

```node
npm install --save-dev storybook-vue3-router
// or
yarn add --dev storybook-vue3-router
```

### Use in your stories
The default setup will create a `vue-router` instance, with 2 routes (`/` and `/about`) - these can be reviewed in the [defaultRoutes.ts](https://github.com/NickMcBurney/storybook-vue3-router/blob/main/src/defaultRoutes.ts) file.

```typescript
/* import storybook-vue3-router */
import vueRouter from 'storybook-vue3-router'

/* ...story setup... */

/* your story export */
export const Default = Template.bind({})

/* adding storybook-vue3-router decorator */
Default.decorators = [
  /* this is the basic setup with no params passed to the decorator */
  vueRouter()
]
```

## Demo
You can see [the examples stories](https://github.com/NickMcBurney/storybook-vue3-router/tree/main/examples) published on this [demo](https://storybook-vue3-router.netlify.app/).

## Advanced usage
This decorator comes with optioal params for customising the implementation of your `vue-router` within Storybook.

### Custom Routes
```typescript
/* define our custom routes */
const customRoutes = [
  {
    path: '/',
    name: 'home',
    component: HomeComponent // this would need to be defined/imported into the `.stories` file
  },
  {
    path: '/about',
    name: 'about',
    component: AboutComponent // this would need to be defined/imported into the `.stories` file
  }
]

/* adding storybook-vue3-router decorator */
Default.decorators = [
  /* pass custom routes to the decorator */
  vueRouter(customRoutes)
]
```

### Custom Routes (with guards)
```typescript
/* define our custom routes */
const customRoutes = [
  // ...
  {
    path: '/admin',
    name: 'admin',
    component: AdminComponent,
    /* add per-route navigation guard */
    beforeEnter: (to, from, next) => {
      // ...
    }
  }
]

/* adding storybook-vue3-router decorator */
Default.decorators = [
  /* pass custom routes to the decorator */
  vueRouter(customRoutes)
]
```

### Custom Routes (with inital route)
By default the decorator will default the starting route to `/`, if you want to change this you can pass as a parametor to the decorator

```typescript
/* define our custom routes */
const customRoutes = [
  {
    path: '/',
    name: 'dashboard',
    component: Dashboard
  },
  {
    path: '/intro',
    name: 'intro',
    component: Intro
  }
]

/* adding storybook-vue3-router decorator */
Default.decorators = [
  /* pass initialRoute to the decorator */
  vueRouter(customRoutes, {
    initialRoute: '/intro'
  })
]
```

See [the examples folder](https://github.com/NickMcBurney/storybook-vue3-router/tree/main/examples) for more advanced usage.

### Decorator Parameters
```typescript

function vueRouter(routes: RouteRecordRaw[], options?: { initialRoute?: string, beforeEach?: NavigationGuard })
```

## v2.x Migration
The migration from v1 brings some breaking changes:

```typescript
// v1.x - 2nd param is used to pass `beforeEach` router guard
// in this example the guard is used to fire a storybook action with `to` and `from` router objects
vueRouter(customRoutes, (to, from) => action('ROUTE CHANGED')({ to: to, from: from })) // LEGACY

// v2.1 - 2nd param is used to pass additional options to the decorator
vueRouter(customRoutes, {
  /* add global beforeEach guard */
  beforeEach: (to, from) => action('ROUTE CHANGED')({ to: to, from: from })
})
```
If you were previously using v1 with router guards in the second parameter, these will need to be refactored to use the [route specific router guards](#custom-routes-with-guards) _(recommended)_ or you can pass your global route guards using the `beforeEach` option.

**_v2.0 DOES NOT HAVE THIS `beforeEach` option, please upgrade to v2.1_**

### ⚠️ Warning:

When using the global `beforeEach` option, if there is an existing story also using this decorator then we must force a page reload in order to setup the specific story router guard and this has a minor UX / performance impact. Checkout the [demo](https://storybook-vue3-router.netlify.app/) for an example of this: README > With Router Guards > Global Guard - when clicking the 'Global Guard' link you will notice the page is refreshed to apply global guards (due to previously existing stories).

This will not be an issue if you are using this decorator for just one story.

After resolving [this issue](https://github.com/NickMcBurney/storybook-vue3-router/issues/7), to enable multiple stories to be created using different route setups, it was noticed that this caused the global `beforeEach` function to be added on every route. For example every time you click a different story the new `beforeEach` hook is added - but previous ones are not removed, this results in multiple guards firing on stories unrelated to the 'active' story.

<!--There is an issue raised here to look into fixing this bug and adding `beforeEach` as an option within the options param e.g. `options?: { initialRoute?: string, beforeEach?: NavigationGuard }`-->

Commit message:

Adding vue-router options option, demo and docs

README.md, after:

# Storybook Vue3 Router

[![minified + gzip size](https://badgen.net/bundlephobia/minzip/storybook-vue3-router)](https://bundlephobia.com/package/storybook-vue3-router)
[![Npm package monthly downloads](https://badgen.net/npm/dm/storybook-vue3-router)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/storybook-vue3-router)
[![Release](https://github.com/NickMcBurney/storybook-vue3-router/actions/workflows/release.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/NickMcBurney/storybook-vue3-router/actions/workflows/release.yml)
[![CodeFactor](https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/nickmcburney/storybook-vue3-router/badge)](https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/nickmcburney/storybook-vue3-router)
[![Storybook](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/storybookjs/brand/master/badge/badge-storybook.svg?sanitize=true)](https://storybook.js.org/addons/storybook-vue3-router/)

A Storybook decorator that allows you to use your Vue 3 routing-aware components.

If you want to build stories for Vue 3 components using `<router-view>` or `<router-link>` then you need to wrap your stories with `vue-router` this addon will allow for you to easily do this.

## How to use
This decorator works with Storybook's [Component Story Format (CSF)](https://storybook.js.org/docs/vue/api/csf) and [hoisted CSF annotations](https://github.com/storybookjs/storybook/blob/next/MIGRATION.md#hoisted-csf-annotations), which is the recommended way to write stories since Storybook 6. It has not been tested with the [storiesOf API](https://github.com/storybookjs/storybook/blob/master/lib/core/docs/storiesOf.md).

### Install the decorator

```node
npm install --save-dev storybook-vue3-router
// or
yarn add --dev storybook-vue3-router
```

### Use in your stories
The default setup will create a `vue-router` instance, with 2 routes (`/` and `/about`) - these can be reviewed in the [defaultRoutes.ts](https://github.com/NickMcBurney/storybook-vue3-router/blob/main/src/defaultRoutes.ts) file.

```typescript
/* import storybook-vue3-router */
import vueRouter from 'storybook-vue3-router'

/* ...story setup... */

/* your story export */
export const Default = Template.bind({})

/* adding storybook-vue3-router decorator */
Default.decorators = [
  /* this is the basic setup with no params passed to the decorator */
  vueRouter()
]
```

## Demo
You can see [the examples stories](https://github.com/NickMcBurney/storybook-vue3-router/tree/main/examples) published on this [demo](https://storybook-vue3-router.netlify.app/).

## Advanced usage
This decorator comes with optioal params for customising the implementation of your `vue-router` within Storybook.

### Custom Routes
```typescript
/* define our custom routes */
const customRoutes = [
  {
    path: '/',
    name: 'home',
    component: HomeComponent // this would need to be defined/imported into the `.stories` file
  },
  {
    path: '/about',
    name: 'about',
    component: AboutComponent // this would need to be defined/imported into the `.stories` file
  }
]

/* adding storybook-vue3-router decorator */
Default.decorators = [
  /* pass custom routes to the decorator */
  vueRouter(customRoutes)
]
```

### Custom Routes (with guards)
```typescript
/* define our custom routes */
const customRoutes = [
  // ...
  {
    path: '/admin',
    name: 'admin',
    component: AdminComponent,
    /* add per-route navigation guard */
    beforeEnter: (to, from, next) => {
      // ...
    }
  }
]

/* adding storybook-vue3-router decorator */
Default.decorators = [
  /* pass custom routes to the decorator */
  vueRouter(customRoutes)
]
```

### Custom Routes (with initial route)
By default the decorator will default the starting route to `/`, if you want to change this you can pass as a paramtor to the decorator

```typescript
/* define our custom routes */
const customRoutes = [
  {
    path: '/',
    name: 'dashboard',
    component: Dashboard
  },
  {
    path: '/intro',
    name: 'intro',
    component: Intro
  }
]

/* adding storybook-vue3-router decorator */
Default.decorators = [
  /* pass initialRoute to the decorator */
  vueRouter(customRoutes, {
    initialRoute: '/intro'
  })
]
```

### With Router Options
We can pass [Vue Router options](https://router.vuejs.org/api/index.html#history) into our decorator.

```typescript
/* adding storybook-vue3-router decorator */
Default.decorators = [
  /* pass vueRouterOptions to the decorator */
  vueRouter(undefined, {
    vueRouterOptions: {
      linkActiveClass: 'my-active-class',
      linkExactActiveClass: 'my-exact-active-class'
      ...etc
    }
  })
]
```

See [the examples folder](https://github.com/NickMcBurney/storybook-vue3-router/tree/main/examples) for more advanced usage.

### Decorator Parameters
```typescript

function vueRouter(routes: RouteRecordRaw[], options?: { initialRoute?: string, beforeEach?: NavigationGuard })
```

## v2.x Migration
The migration from v1 brings some breaking changes:

```typescript
// v1.x - 2nd param is used to pass `beforeEach` router guard
// in this example the guard is used to fire a storybook action with `to` and `from` router objects
vueRouter(customRoutes, (to, from) => action('ROUTE CHANGED')({ to: to, from: from })) // LEGACY

// v2.1 - 2nd param is used to pass additional options to the decorator
vueRouter(customRoutes, {
  /* add global beforeEach guard */
  beforeEach: (to, from) => action('ROUTE CHANGED')({ to: to, from: from })
})
```
If you were previously using v1 with router guards in the second parameter, these will need to be refactored to use the [route specific router guards](#custom-routes-with-guards) _(recommended)_ or you can pass your global route guards using the `beforeEach` option.

**_v2.0 DOES NOT HAVE THIS `beforeEach` option, please upgrade to v2.1_**

### ⚠️ Warning:

When using the global `beforeEach` option, if there is an existing story also using this decorator then we must force a page reload in order to setup the specific story router guard and this has a minor UX / performance impact. Checkout the [demo](https://storybook-vue3-router.netlify.app/) for an example of this: README > With Router Guards > Global Guard - when clicking the 'Global Guard' link you will notice the page is refreshed to apply global guards (due to previously existing stories).

This will not be an issue if you are using this decorator for just one story.

After resolving [this issue](https://github.com/NickMcBurney/storybook-vue3-router/issues/7), to enable multiple stories to be created using different route setups, it was noticed that this caused the global `beforeEach` function to be added on every route. For example every time you click a different story the new `beforeEach` hook is added - but previous ones are not removed, this results in multiple guards firing on stories unrelated to the 'active' story.

<!--There is an issue raised here to look into fixing this bug and adding `beforeEach` as an option within the options param e.g. `options?: { initialRoute?: string, beforeEach?: NavigationGuard }`-->
